---
layout: default
modal-id: 6
date: 2023-05-31
img: model.png
alt: image-alt
title: Macroscopic quantum mechanics
---
Quantum mechanical phenomena are at the fundations of any macroscopic observable. However, the elevated complexity together with the astronomical number of degrees of freedom involved makes impractical its to directly apply quantum mechanics to mesoscopic systems. Macroscopic quantum mechanics deals with the manifestation of quantum mechanical behavior at larger scales, and is typically enabled by cooperation effects between a large number of particles. 
My main research interest is identifying  crucial factors governing emergent quantum phenomena to then include them in effective and/or coarse-grained models to bridge the quantum world to larger length and time scales.

<h3 class="post-section">Entanglement in ultra-cold atoms</h3>

Bose-Einstein condensates embody one of the most typical examples of emergent quantum phenomena. They can be realized in systems as simple as ultra-cold atomic gases confined in laser traps, where atoms can move from one potential well to another through quantum tunnelling. The entanglement between the wells then creates quantum states that can be considered as a real-life concretizaation of the Schroedinger-cat experiment.

<p style='text-indent: 15px;'><b>Further reading:</b> <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1410.5321.pdf" class="link-info">Double well traps</a></p>

<h3 class="post-section">Optical spectra</h3>

The inclusion of electron-hole bound states, known as excitons, is essential to correctly estimate the optical response of semiconductors as simple as silicon. This requires the solution of the Bethe-Salpeter equation, which is generally fairly computational expensive to evaluate. I took part to the implementation of a methodology that employs an optimal basis set approach to express excitonic states through a reduced number of degrees of freedom.

<p style='text-indent: 15px;'><b>Further reading:</b> <a href="https://journals.aps.org/prresearch/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.5.L012028" class="link-info">SIMPLE code</a></p>

<h3 class="post-section">Atomistic spin dynamics</h3>
Magnetization dynamics underpins a multitude of modern technologies, ranging from sensing devices to memory storage. The latter can be highly sensitive to the local atomic structure, yet only the behaviour of the global magnetisation matters for most materials relevant of applications. In such cases, the magnetic moments localised at atomic sites can be represented as a classical (Heisenberg-like) spin vectors, and their dynamics can be described through the Landau-Lischfitz-Gilbert equation. I contributed to the formuation of a methodology to use first principles calculations to parameterise atomistic spin models for current-driven spin dynamics in ferromagnetics and anti-ferromagnetics materials.

<p style='text-indent: 15px;'><b>Further reading:</b> <a href="https://journals.aps.org/prb/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevB.100.214434" class="link-info">longitudinal spin fluctuations</a>, <a href="http://www.tara.tcd.ie/handle/2262/91664" class="link-info">current-driven spin dynamics</a></p>

<h3 class="post-section">Van der Waals dispersion and dynamical effects</h3>
Van der Waals dispersion interactions provide a relatively small energetic contribution, yet can be essential to guide the global dynamics of nanoscale systems. However, such effects become relevant only for systems of 60+ atoms, and their importance for biological systems made of ~10k atoms is of troublesome determination given the high number of degrees of freedom and the consequent high computatioanl cost. I am involved in a project that aims for a continuum description of MBD interactions for polymers, which should be able to shed light on the influence of MBD in polymer melts.
