---
layout: default
modal-id: 3
date: 2023-05-21
img: vdWsite.png
alt: image-alt
title: Many-body dispersion interactions
---

Van der Waals (vdW) dispersion interactions are obiquitous in atomic and molecular structures and arise from the coupling of instantaneous charge density fluctuations. Such density correlations are systematically neglected by density-based approaches (e.g. DFT), thus they have to be added separately. The most common approximation localizes the fluctuations at atomic nuclei, and assumes them to be dipolar and pairwise, obtaining the sttractive part of the Lennard-Jones potential,
\begin{equation}
    E_{PW} = \sum_{i<j} \frac{C_6^{ij}}{R_{ij}^6}\quad\textrm{with}\quad C_6^{ij} = \frac{3}{\pi}\int d\omega \ \alpha^i(\omega)\ \alpha^j(\omega),
\end{equation}
where the atomic polarizability, $$\alpha^i$$, embodies the local atomic environment. The latter can also be used to tailor the frequency, $$\omega_i$$, of a quantum harmonic oscillator to effectively reproduce the electron desity response of each atom. It can be shown <a href="https://orbilu.uni.lu/bitstream/10993/25084/1/Long-range%20correlation%20energy%20calculated%20from%20coupled%20atomic%20response%20function.pdf">Ambrosetti2014</a> that the interaction energy of the atomic oscillators coupled through a dipole-dipole potential accounts nonperturbatively for contributions to the dispersion energy at all many-body contributions at RPA level.
The resulting forces are typically longer ranged and become highly sensitive to structural details, as described on another post.

#### Coarse-graining strategies for MBD

I am currently taking part in the development of coarse-graining strategies to bridge MBD to larger and larger scales. So...stay tuned!
