---
layout: default
modal-id: 4
date: 2023-05-17
img: mbpt.png
alt: image-alt
title: Many-body Green's functions
---
A major portion of the electronic structure calculations performed today rely on the solution of the Schroedinger equation in the independent particle picture (e.g. KS-DFT). Nevertheless, several phenomena critically depend on either higher levels of correlation or on thermodynamical conditions that elude the capabilities of DFT approaches. Green's functions (GFs) are the ideal mathematical tool to extend DFT because:
<ol class="list-text">
<li>given the GF of an electronic system any related property can be calculated;</li>
<li>a perturbation theory can be naturally defined, and the influence of additional factors (e.g. phonons, higher order correlations, ...) can be readily included given the relevant <b>self-energy</b>;</li>
<li>they can be tailored to include couplings to reservoirs and non-adiabatic interactions with the environment.</li>
</ol>

<h4 style='text-transform: none;'>Excitons and optical properties</h4>

Considering electron-hole pairs is essential to correctly predict the optical response of materials as simple as bulk Si. This can be done by solving the stationary equation of motion for the 2-particle (4-body) GF, known as the Bether-Salpeter equation (BSE). I contributed to the implementation of such methodology in the <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1901.03175.pdf">SIMPLE</a> code, now part of the Quantum Espresso suite of DFT codes.
<h4 style='text-transform: none;'>Quantum transport</h4>
The study of how electric currents propagate across nanoscale structures is instrumental for the development of novel electronic components. Quantum transport calulations require the system of interest, also called extended molecule (EM) to be contacted to two (or more) electrodes that serve as particle reservoirs. This makes the overall system infinite, and therefore described through an infinite dimensional Hamiltonian. Green's functions, however, allow to write the interaction between each contact and the extended molecule through an effective self-energy that only depends on the degrees of freedom of the EM {REF}. The Green's function for the EM then becomes finite, therefore treatable.

nuovo

<b>COMPLETE</b>